New Introductory Example (#925)
SciML/ModelingToolkit.jl: docs/src/tutorials/ode_modeling.md

# Composing Ordinary Differential Equations

This is an introductory example for the usage of ModelingToolkit (MTK).

> It illustrates the basic user-faced functionality by means of some

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It illustrates the basic user-facing functionality by means of some

```

examples of Ordinary Differential Equations (ODE). Some references to
more specific documentation are given at appropriate places.

> ## Your very first ODE
> Let us start with a minimal example. The system to be modelled is a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Your very first ODE

Let us start with a minimal example. The system to be modelled is a

```

Let us start with a minimal example. The system to be modelled is a
first-order lag element:

```math
\dot{x} = \frac{f(t) - x(t)}{\tau}
```

Here, ``t`` is the independent variable (time), ``x(t)`` is the (scalar) state variable,
``f(t)`` is an external forcing function, and ``\tau`` is a constant parameter. In MTK, this system can be modelled as follows. For simplicity, we first set the forcing function to
a constant value.

```julia
using ModelingToolkit

@variables t, x(t)  # independent and dependent variables
@parameters τ       # parameters
D = Differential(t) # define an operator for the differentiation w.r.t. time

# your first ODE, consisting of a single equation, indicated by ~
@named fol_model = ODESystem(D(x) ~ (1 - x)/τ)
      # Model fol_model with 1 equations
      # States (1):
      #   x(t)
      # Parameters (1):
      #   τ
```

Note that equations in MTK use the tilde character (`~`) as equality sign.
The `@named` macro just adds the keyword-argument `name` to the call of
`ODESystem`. Its value is the name of the variable the system is assigned to.
For this example, calling `fol_model = ODESystem(...; name=:fol_model)` would do

> exactly the same.

Reviewer: seems like a detail not necessary to mention here.

However, this DAE system can obviously be transformed into the single ODE we used in the
first example above. MTK achieves this by means of structural simplification:

```julia
fol_simplified = structural_simplify(fol_separate)

equations(fol_simplified)
      # 1-element Array{Equation,1}:
      #  Differential(t)(x(t)) ~ (τ^-1)*(1 - x(t))

equations(fol_simplified) == equations(fol_model)
      # true
```

You can extract the equations from a system using `equations` (and, in the same way,
`variables` and `parameters`). The simplified equation is exactly the same as the
original one, so the simulation performence will also be the same.
However, there is one difference. MTK does keep track of the eliminated
algebraic variables as "observables" (see [Observables and Variable Elimination](@ref)).
That means, MTK still knows how to calculate them out of the information available
in a simulation result. The intermediate variable `RHS` therefore can be plotted
along with the state variable. Note that this has to be requested explicitly, though:

```julia
prob = ODEProblem(fol_simplified, [x => 0.0], (0.0,10.0), [τ => 3.0])

> sol = solve(prob)

Reviewer: also show `sol[RHS]` and `sol[x,2:10]` accessing?

What if the forcing function (the "external input") ``f(t)`` is not constant?
Obviously, one could use an explicit, symbolic function of time:

```julia
@variables f(t)
@named fol_variable_f = ODESystem([f ~ sin(t), D(x) ~ (f - x)/τ])
```

But often there is time-series data, such as measurement data from an experiment,
we want to embedd as data in the simulation of a PDE, or as a forcing function on the right-hand side of an ODE -- is it is the case here. For this, MTK allows to "register" arbitrary
Julia functions, which are excluded from symbolic transformations but are just used
as-is. So, you could, for example, interpolate a given time series using
[DataInterpolations.jl](https://github.com/PumasAI/DataInterpolations.jl). Here,
we illustrate this option by a simple lookup ("zero-order hold") of a vector
of random values:

```julia
value_vector = randn(10)
f_fun(t) = t >= 10 ? value_vector[end] : value_vector[Int(floor(t))+1]
@register f_fun(t)

@named fol_external_f = ODESystem([f ~ f_fun(t), D(x) ~ (f - x)/τ])
prob = ODEProblem(structural_simplify(fol_external_f), [x => 0.0], (0.0,10.0), [τ => 0.75])

using DifferentialEquations: Rodas4

> sol = solve(prob, Rodas4())

Reviewer: is this necessary?

Julia functions, which are excluded from symbolic transformations but are just used
as-is. So, you could, for example, interpolate a given time series using
[DataInterpolations.jl](https://github.com/PumasAI/DataInterpolations.jl). Here,
we illustrate this option by a simple lookup ("zero-order hold") of a vector
of random values:

```julia
value_vector = randn(10)
f_fun(t) = t >= 10 ? value_vector[end] : value_vector[Int(floor(t))+1]
@register f_fun(t)

@named fol_external_f = ODESystem([f ~ f_fun(t), D(x) ~ (f - x)/τ])
prob = ODEProblem(structural_simplify(fol_external_f), [x => 0.0], (0.0,10.0), [τ => 0.75])

using DifferentialEquations: Rodas4
sol = solve(prob, Rodas4())
plot(sol, vars=[x,f])
```

![Simulation result of first-order lag element, step-wise forcing function](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/13935112/111958424-83ea8880-8aed-11eb-8f42-489f4b44c3bc.png)

Note that for this problem, the implicit solver `Rodas4` is used, to cleanly resolve
the steps in the forcing function.

## Building component-based, hierarchical models
Working with simple one-equation systems is already fun, but composing more complex systems from

> simple ones is even more fun. Best practice for such a "modelling framework" could be to use

Reviewer: ```suggestion
simple ones is even more fun. Best practice for such a "modeling framework" could be to use

```

```julia
function fol_factory(separate=false;name)
    @parameters τ
    @variables t x(t) f(t) RHS(t)

    eqs = separate ? [RHS ~ (f - x)/τ,
                      D(x) ~ RHS] :
                      D(x) ~(f - x)/τ

    ODESystem(eqs;name)
end
```

Such a factory can then used to instantiate the same component multiple times, but allows
for customization:

```julia
@named fol_1 = fol_factory()
@named fol_2 = fol_factory(true) # has observable RHS
```

Now, these two components can be used as subsystems of a parent system, i.e. one level
higher in the model hierarchy. The connections between the components again are just
algebraic relations:

```julia
connections = [ fol_1.f ~ 1.5,
                fol_2.f ~ fol_1.x ]

@named connected = ODESystem(connections; systems=[fol_1,fol_2])
      # Model connected with 5 equations
      # States (5):
      #   fol_1₊f(t)
      #   fol_2₊f(t)
      #   fol_1₊x(t)
      #   fol_2₊x(t)
      # ⋮
      # Parameters (2):
      #   fol_1₊τ
      #   fol_2₊τ
```

All equations, variables and parameters are collected, but the structure of the
hierarchical model is still preserved. That is, you can still get information about

> `fol_1` by addressing it by `connected.fol_1`, or its parameter by `connected.fol_1.τ`.
> Before simulation, we again eliminate the algebraic variables (i.e. the "placeholders"
> and the "connections") from the system using structural simplification:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`fol_1` by addressing it by `connected.fol_1`, or its parameter by `connected.fol_1.τ`.
Before simulation, we again eliminate the algebraic variables (i.e. the "connections") 
from the system using structural simplification:

```

explicitly, and that the incidence matrix of partial derivatives (the "sparsity pattern")
can also be explicitly derived. These two facts lead to a substantial speedup of all
model calculations, e.g. when simulating a model over time using an ODE solver.

By default, analytical derivatives and sparse matrices, e.g. for the Jacobian, the matrix of first
partial derivatives, are not used. Let's benchmark this (`prob` still is the problem using the
`connected_simp` system above):

```julia
using BenchmarkTools

@btime solve(prob, Rodas4());
      # 251.300 μs (873 allocations: 31.18 KiB)
```

Now have MTK provide sparse, analytical derivatives to the solver. This has to be
specified during the construction of the `ODEProblem`:

```julia
prob_an = ODEProblem(connected_simp, u0, (0.0,10.0), p; jac=true, sparse=true)

@btime solve(prob_an, Rodas4());
      # 142.899 μs (1297 allocations: 83.96 KiB)
```

The speedup is significant. For this small dense model (3 of 4 entries are populated), using sparse matrices is contraproductive in terms of required memory allocations. For large,
hierarchically built models, which tend to be sparse, speedup and the reduction of

> memory allocation can be expected to be substantial.

Reviewer: Mention parallelism as well?

```julia
function fol_factory(separate=false;name)
    @parameters τ
    @variables t x(t) f(t) RHS(t)

    eqs = separate ? [RHS ~ (f - x)/τ,
                      D(x) ~ RHS] :
                      D(x) ~(f - x)/τ

    ODESystem(eqs;name)
end
```

Such a factory can then used to instantiate the same component multiple times, but allows
for customization:

```julia
@named fol_1 = fol_factory()
@named fol_2 = fol_factory(true) # has observable RHS
```

Now, these two components can be used as subsystems of a parent system, i.e. one level
higher in the model hierarchy. The connections between the components again are just
algebraic relations:

```julia
connections = [ fol_1.f ~ 1.5,
                fol_2.f ~ fol_1.x ]

@named connected = ODESystem(connections; systems=[fol_1,fol_2])
      # Model connected with 5 equations
      # States (5):
      #   fol_1₊f(t)
      #   fol_2₊f(t)
      #   fol_1₊x(t)
      #   fol_2₊x(t)
      # ⋮
      # Parameters (2):
      #   fol_1₊τ
      #   fol_2₊τ
```

All equations, variables and parameters are collected, but the structure of the
hierarchical model is still preserved. That is, you can still get information about

> `fol_1` by addressing it by `connected.fol_1`, or its parameter by `connected.fol_1.τ`.
> Before simulation, we again eliminate the algebraic variables (i.e. the "connections") 
> from the system using structural simplification:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`fol_1` by addressing it by `connected.fol_1`, or its parameter by `connected.fol_1.τ`.
Before simulation, we again eliminate the algebraic variables and connection equations
from the system using structural simplification:

```

As mentioned above, the hierarchical structure is preserved though. So the
initial state and the parameter values can be specified accordingly when
building the `ODEProblem`:

```julia
u0 = [ fol_1.x => -0.5,
       fol_2.x => 1.0 ]

p = [ fol_1.τ => 2.0,
      fol_2.τ => 4.0 ]

prob = ODEProblem(connected_simp, u0, (0.0,10.0), p)
solve(prob) |> plot
```

![Simulation of connected system (two first-order lag elements in series)](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/13935112/111958439-877e0f80-8aed-11eb-9074-9d35458459a4.png)

More on this topic may be found in [Composing Models and Building Reusable Components](@ref).

## Defaults
Often it is a good idea to specify reasonable values for the initial state and the
parameters of a model component. Then, these do not have to be explicitly specified when constructing the `ODEProblem`.

```julia
function unitstep_fol_factory(;name)
    @parameters τ
    @variables t x(t)
    ODESystem(D(x) ~ (1 - x)/τ; name, defaults=Dict(x=>0.0, τ=>1.0))
end

ODEProblem(unitstep_fol_factory(name=:fol),[],(0.0,5.0),[]) |> solve
```

Of course, the factory function could accept additional arguments to optionally

> specify the initial state or parameter values, etc. As the name says, MTK is a
> toolkit, not a modelling framework. The latter is up to you and depends on your
> specific needs and requirements.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
specify the initial state or parameter values, etc.
```

      # 251.300 μs (873 allocations: 31.18 KiB)
```

Now have MTK provide sparse, analytical derivatives to the solver. This has to be
specified during the construction of the `ODEProblem`:

```julia
prob_an = ODEProblem(connected_simp, u0, (0.0,10.0), p; jac=true, sparse=true)

@btime solve(prob_an, Rodas4());
      # 142.899 μs (1297 allocations: 83.96 KiB)
```

The speedup is significant. For this small dense model (3 of 4 entries are populated), using sparse matrices is contraproductive in terms of required memory allocations. For large,
hierarchically built models, which tend to be sparse, speedup and the reduction of
memory allocation can be expected to be substantial.

## Notes and pointers how to go on
Here are some notes that may be helpful during your initial steps with MTK:

* Sometimes, the symbolic engine within MTK is not able to correctly identify the
  independent variable (e.g. time) out of all variables. In such a case, you usually
  get an error that some variable(s) is "missing from variable map". In most cases,
  it is then sufficient to specify the independent variable as second argument to
  `ODESystem`, e.g. `ODESystem(eqs, t)`.

> * A completely macro-free usage of MTK is possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A completely macro-free usage of MTK is possible and is discussed in a separate tutorial. This is for package
  developers, since the macros are only essential for automatic symbolic naming for modelers.

```

* Vector-valued parameters and variables are possible. A cleaner, more consistent treatment of
  these is work in progress, though. Once finished, this introductory tutorial will also
  cover this feature.

Where to go next?

* Not sure how MTK relates to similar tools and packages? Read [Comparison of ModelingToolkit vs Equation-Based Modeling Languages](@ref).

* Depending on what you want to do with MTK, have a look at some of the other **Symbolic Modeling Tutorials**.

* If you want to automatically convert an existing function to a symbolic representation, you might go through the **ModelingToolkitize Tutorials**.

> * To learn more about the inner workings of MTK, consider the sections under **Basics** and **System Types**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* To learn more about the inner workings of MTK, consider the sections under **Basics** and **System Types**.
```suggestion
* To learn more about the details of using MTK, consider the sections under **Basics** and **System Types**.
```
```

as if you had manually eliminated as many variables as possible from the equations.
As mentioned above, the hierarchical structure is preserved though. So the
initial state and the parameter values can be specified accordingly when
building the `ODEProblem`:

```julia
u0 = [ fol_1.x => -0.5,
       fol_2.x => 1.0 ]

p = [ fol_1.τ => 2.0,
      fol_2.τ => 4.0 ]

prob = ODEProblem(connected_simp, u0, (0.0,10.0), p)
solve(prob) |> plot
```

![Simulation of connected system (two first-order lag elements in series)](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/13935112/111958439-877e0f80-8aed-11eb-9074-9d35458459a4.png)

More on this topic may be found in [Composing Models and Building Reusable Components](@ref).

## Defaults
Often it is a good idea to specify reasonable values for the initial state and the
parameters of a model component. Then, these do not have to be explicitly specified when constructing the `ODEProblem`.

```julia
function unitstep_fol_factory(;name)
    @parameters τ
    @variables t x(t)
    ODESystem(D(x) ~ (1 - x)/τ; name, defaults=Dict(x=>0.0, τ=>1.0))
end

ODEProblem(unitstep_fol_factory(name=:fol),[],(0.0,5.0),[]) |> solve
```

> Of course, the factory function could accept additional arguments to optionally

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the defaults can be functions of the other variables, which is then resolved
at the time of the problem construction.
Of course, the factory function could accept additional arguments to optionally
```

at the time of the problem construction.
Of course, the factory function could accept additional arguments to optionally
specify the initial state or parameter values, etc.

## Symbolic and sparse derivatives
One advantage of a symbolic toolkit is that derivatives can be calculated
explicitly, and that the incidence matrix of partial derivatives (the "sparsity pattern")
can also be explicitly derived. These two facts lead to a substantial speedup of all
model calculations, e.g. when simulating a model over time using an ODE solver.

By default, analytical derivatives and sparse matrices, e.g. for the Jacobian, the matrix of first
partial derivatives, are not used. Let's benchmark this (`prob` still is the problem using the
`connected_simp` system above):

```julia
using BenchmarkTools

@btime solve(prob, Rodas4());
      # 251.300 μs (873 allocations: 31.18 KiB)
```

Now have MTK provide sparse, analytical derivatives to the solver. This has to be
specified during the construction of the `ODEProblem`:

```julia
prob_an = ODEProblem(connected_simp, u0, (0.0,10.0), p; jac=true, sparse=true)

@btime solve(prob_an, Rodas4());
      # 142.899 μs (1297 allocations: 83.96 KiB)
```

> The speedup is significant. For this small dense model (3 of 4 entries are populated), using sparse matrices is contraproductive in terms of required memory allocations. For large,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The speedup is significant. For this small dense model (3 of 4 entries are populated), using sparse matrices is counterproductive in terms of required memory allocations. For large,

```
